PREFACE 

While Louis D. Brandeis's series of articles on the money trust was running in
Harper's Weekly many inquiries came about publication in more accessible
permanent form. Even without such urgence through the mail, however, it would
have been clear that these articles inevitably constituted a book, since they
embodied an analysis and a narrative by that mind which, on the great
industrial movements of our era, is the most expert in the United States. The
inquiries meant that the attentive public recognized that here was a
contribution to history. Here was the clearest and most profound treatment ever
published on that part of our business development which, as President Wilson
and other wise men have said, has come to constitute the greatest of our
problems. The story of our time is the story of industry. No scholar of the
future will be able to describe our era with authority unless he comprehends
that expansion and concentration which followed the harnessing of steam and
electricity, the great uses of the change, and the great excesses. No historian
of the future, in my opinion, will find among our contemporary documents so
masterful an analysis of why concentration went astray. I am but one among many
who look upon jMr. Brandeis as having, in the field of economics, the most
inventive and sound mind of our time. While his articles were running in
Harper's Weekly I had ample opportunity to know how widespread was the belief
among intelligent men that this brilliant diagnosis of our money trust was the
most important contribution to current thought in many years. 

"Great" is one of the words that I do not use loosely, and I look upon Mr.
Brandeis as a great man. In the composition of his intellect, one of the most
important elements is his comprehension of figures. As one of the leading
financiers of the country said to me, "Mr. Brandeis's greatness as a lawyer is
part of his greatness as a mathematician." My views on this subject are
sufficiently indicated in the following editorial in Harper's Weekly. 

ARITHMETIC 

About five years before tlic Metropolitan Traction Compunj' of New York went
into tlie hands of a receiver, Mr. Bnindeis came down from lioston, and in a
speech at Cooper Union prophesied that that company must fail, 

Leading bankers in New York and Boston were heartily recommending the stock to
their customers. Mr. Brandeis made his prophecy merely by analyzing the
published figures. How did he win in the Pinchot-Glavis-Ballinger controversy?
In various ways, no doubt; but perhaps the most critical step was when he
calculated just how long it would take a fast worker to go through the
Glavis-Ballinger record and make a judgment of it; whereupon he decided that
Mr. Wickersham could not have made his report at the time it was stated to have
been made, and therefore it must have been predated. 

Most of Mr. Brandeis's other contributions to current history have involved
arithmetic. When he succeeded in preventing a raise in freight rates, it was
through an exact analysis of cost. When he got Savings Bank Insurance started
in Massachusetts, it was by being able to figure what insurance ought to cost.
When he made the best contract between a city and a public utility that exists
in this country, a definite grasp of the gas business was necessary — combined,
of course, with the wisdom and originality that make a statesman. He could not
have invented the preferential shop if that new idea had not been founded on a
precise knowledge of the conditions in the garment trades. When he established
before the United States Supreme Court the constitutionality of legislation
affecting women only, he relied much less upon reason than upon the amount of
knowledge displayed of what actually happens to women when they are overworked
— which, while not arithmetic, is built on the same intellectual quality.
Nearly two years before Mr. Mellen resigned from the New Haven Railroad, Mr.
Brandeis wrote to the present editor of this paper a private letter in which he
said: 

"When the New Haven reduces its dividends and Mellen resigns, the ' Decline of
New Haven and Fall of Mellen' will make a dramatic story of human interest with
a moral — or two — including the evils of private monopoly. Events cannot be
long deferred, and possibly you may want to prepare for their coming. 

"Anticipating the future a little, I suggest the following as an epitaph or
obituary notice: 

"Mellen was a masterful man, resourceful, courageous, broad of view. He fired
the imagination of New England; but, being obUque of vision, merely distorted
its judgment and silenced its conscience. For a while he trampled with impunity
on laws human and divine; but, as he was obsessed with the delusion that two
and two make five, he fell, at last, a victim to the relentless rules of humble
arithmetic. 

'"Remember, O Stranger, Arithmetic is the first of the sciences and the mother
of safety.'" 

The exposure of the bad jBnancial management of the New Haven raikoad, more
than anyother one thing, led to the exposure and comprehension of the wasteful
methods of big business all over the country and that exposure of the New Haven
was the almost single-handed work of Mr. Brandeis. He is a person who fights
against any odds while it is necessary to fight and stops fighting as soon as
the fight is won. For a long time very respectable and honest leaders of
finance said that his charges against the New Haven were unsound and
inexcusable. He kept ahead. A year before the actual crash came, however, he
ceased worrying, for he knew the work had been carried far enough to complete
itself. When someone asked him to take part in some little controversy shortly
before the collapse, he replied, "That fight does not need me any longer. Time
and arithmetic will do the rest." 

This grasp of the concrete is combined in Mr. Brandeis with an equally
distinguished grasp of bearing and significance. His imagination is as notable
as his understanding of business. In those accomplishments which have given him
his place in American life, the two sides of his mind have worked together. The
arrangement between the Gas Company and the City of Boston rests on one of the
guiding principles of Mr. Brandeis' s life, that no contract is good that is
not advantageous to both parties to it. Behind his understanding of the methods
of obtaining insurance and the proper cost of it to the laboring man lay a
philosophy of the vast advantage to the fibre and energy of the community that
would come from devising methods by which the laboring classes could make
themselves comfortable through their whole lives and thus perhaps making
unnecessary elaborate systems of state help. The most important ideas put forth
in the Armstrong Committee Report on insurance had been previously suggested by
Mr. Brandeis, acting as counsel for the Equitable policy holders. Business and
the more important statesmanship were intimately combined in the management of
the Protocol in New York, which has done so much to improve conditions in the
clothing industry. The welfare of the laborer and his relation to his employer
seems to Mr. Brandeis, as it does to all the most competent thinkers today,
to constitute the most important question we have to solve, and he won the
case, coming up to the Supreme Court of the United States, from Oregon,
establishing the constitutionality of special protective legislation for women.
In the IMinimum Wage case, also from the State of Oregon, which is about to be
heard before the Supreme Court, he takes up what is really a logical sequence
of the limitation of women's hours in certain industries, since it would be a
futile performance to limit their hours and then allow their wages to be cut
down in consequence. These industrial activities are in large part an
expression of liis deep and ever growing sympathy with the working people and
understanding of them. Florence Kelley once said: "No man since Lincoln has
understood the common people as Louis Brandies does." 

While the majority of Mr. Brandeis's great progressive achievements have been
connected with the industrial system, some have been political in a more
limited sense. I worked with him through the Ballinger-Pinchot controversy, and
I never saw a grasp of detail more brilliantly combined with high constructive
ethical and political thinking. After the man who knew most about the details
of the Interior Department had been cross-examined by Mr. Brandeis he came and
sat down by me and said: "Mr. Hapgood, I have no respect for you. I do not
think your motives in this agitation are good motives, but I want to say that
you have a wonderful lawyer. He knows as much about the Interior Department
today as I do." In that controversy, the power of the administration and of the
ruling forces in the House and Senate were combined to protect Secretary
Ballinger and prevent the truth from coming to light. Mr. Brandeis, in leading
the fight or the conservation side, was constantly haunted by the idea that
there was a mystery somewhere. The editorial printed above hints at how ho
solved the mystery, but it would require much more space to tell the other
sides, the enthusiasm for conservation, the convincing arguments for higher
standards in office, the connection of this conspiracy with the country's
larger needs. Seldom is an audience at a hearing so moved as it was by Mr.
Brandeis's final plea to the committee. 

Possibly his work on railroads will turn out to be the most significant among
the many things Mr. Brandeis has done. His arguments in 1910-11 before the
Interstate Commerce Commission against the raising of rates, on the ground that
the way for railroads to be more prosperous was to be more efficient, made
efficiency a national idea. It is a cardinal point in his philosophy that the
only real progress toward a higher national life will come through efficiency
in all our activities. The seventy-eight questions addressed to the railroads
by the Interstate Commerce Commission in December, 1913, embody what is
probably the most comprehensive embodiment of his thought on the subject. 

On nothing has he ever worked harder than on his diagnosis of the Money Trust,
and when his life comes to be written (I hope many years hence) this will be
ranked with his railroad work for its effect in accelerating industrial
changes. It is indeed more than a coincidence that so many of the things he has
been contending for have come to pass. It is seldom that one man puts one idea,
not to say many ideas, effectively before the world, but it is no exaggeration
to say that Mr. Brandeis is responsible for the now widespread recognition of
the inherent weakness of great size. He was the first person who set forth
effectively the doctrine that there is a limit to the size of greatest
efficiency, and the successful demonstration of that truth is a profound
contribution to the subject of trusts. The demonstration is powerfully put in
his testimony before the Senate Committee in 1911, and it is powerfully put in
this volume. In destroying the delusion that efficiency was a common incident
of size, he emphasized the possibility of efficiency through intensive
development of the individual, thus connecting this principle with his whole
study of efficiency, and pointing the way to industrial democracy. 

Not less notable than the intellect and the constructive ability that have gone
into Mr. Brandeis' s work are the exceptional moral qualities. Any powerful and
entirely sincere crusader must sacrifice much. Mr. Brandeis has sacrificed much
in money, in agreeableness of social life, in effort, and he has done it for
principle and for human happiness. His power of intensive work, his sustained
interest and will, and his courage have been necessary for leadership. No man
could have done what he has done without being willing to devote his life to
making his dreams come true. 

Nor should anyone make the mistake, because the labors of Mr. Brandeis and
others have recently brought about changes, that the system which was being
attacked has been undermined. The currency bill has been passed, and as these
words are written, it looks as if a group of trust bills would be passed. But
systems are not ended in a day. Of the truths which are embodied in the essays
printed in this book, some are being carried out now, but it will be many, many
years before the whole idea can be made effective; and there will, therefore,
be many, many years during which active citizens will be struggling for those
principles which are here so clearly, so eloquently, so conclusively set forth. 
