CHAPTER IV: SERVE ONE MASTER ONLY 

The Pujo Committee has presented the facts concerning the Money Trust so
clearly that the conclusions appear inevitable. Their diagnosis discloses
intense financial concentration and the means by which it is effected.
Combination, — the intertwining of interests, — is shown to be the
all-pervading vice of the present system. With a view to freeing industry, the
Committee recommends the enactment of twenty-one specific remedial provisions.
Most of these measures are wisely framed to meet some abuse disclosed by the
evidence; and if all of these were adopted the Pujo legislation would
undoubtedly alleviate present suffering and aid in arresting the disease. But
many of the remedies proposed are "local" ones; and a cure is not possible,
without treatment which is fundamental. Indeed, a major operation is necessary.
This the Committee has hesitated to advise; although the fundamental treatment
required is simple: "Serve one Master only." 

The evils incident to interlocking dii-ectorates are, of course, fully
recognized; but the prohibitions proposed in that respect ai*e restricted to a
very narrow sphere. 

First: The Committee recognizes that potentially competing corporations should
not have a common director; — but it restricts this prohibition to directors of
national banks, saying: 

"No ofRcer or director of a national bank shall be an officer or director of
any other bank or of any trust company or other financial or other corporation
or institution, whether organized under state or federal law, that is
authorized to receive money on deposit or that is engaged in the business of
loaning money on collateral or in buying and selling securities except as in
this section provided; and no person shall be an officer or director of any
national bank who is a private banker or a member of a firm or partnership of
bankers that is engaged in the business of receiving deposits: Provided, That
such bank, trust company, financial institution, banker, or firm of bankers is
located at or engaged in business at or in the same city, town, or village as
that in which such national bank is located or engaged in business: Provided
further. That a director of a national bank or a partner of such director may
be an officer or director of not more than one trust company organized by the
laws of the state in which such national bank is engaged in business and doing
business at the same place." 

Second: The Committee recognizes that a corporation should not make a contract
in which one of the management has a private interest; but it restricts this
prohibition (1) to national banks, and (2) to the officers, saying: 

*'No national bank shall lend or advance money or credit or purchase or
discount any promissory note, draft, bill of exchange or other evidence of debt
bearing the signature or indorsement of any of its officers or of any
partnership of which such officer is a member, directly or indirectly, or of
any corporation in which such officer owns or has a beneficial interest of
upward of ten per centum of the capital stock, or lend or advance money or
credit to, for or on behalf of any such officer or of any such partnership or
corporation, or purchase any security from any such officer or of or from any
partnership or corporation of which such officer is a member or in which he is
financially interested, as herein specified, or of any corporation of which any
of its officers is an officer at the time of such transaction." 

Prohibitions of intertwining relations so restricted, however supplemented by
other provisions, will not end financial concentration. The Money Trust snake
will, at most, be scotched, not killed. The prohibition of a common director in
potentially competing corporations should apply to state banks and trust
companies, as well as to national banks; and it should apply to railroad and
industrial corporations as fully as to banking institutions. The prohibition
of corporate contracts in which one of the management has a private interest
should apply to directors, as well as to officers, and to state banks and trust
companies and to other classes of corporations, as well as to national banks.
And, as will be hereafter shown, such broad legislation is within the power of
Congress. 

Let us examine this further: 

THE PROHIBITION OF COMMON DIRECTORS IN POTENTIALLY COMPETING CORPORATIONS 

1. National Baiiks. The objection to common directors, as applied to banking
institutions, is clearly shown by the Pujo Committee. 

"As the first and foremost step in applying a remedy, and also for reasons
that seem to us conclusive, independently of that consideration, we recommend
that interlocking directorates in potentially competing financial institutions
be abolished and prohibited so far as lies in the power of Congress to bring
about that result. ...When we find, as in a number of instances, the same
man a director in half a dozen or more banks and trust companies all located in
the same section of the same city, doing the same class of business and with a
like set of associates similarly situated, all belonging to the same group and
representing the same class of interests, all further pretense of competition
is useless. ... If banks serving the same field are to be permitted to have
common directors, genuine competition will be rendered impossible. Besides,
this practice gives to such common directors the unfair advantage of knowing
the affairs of borrowers in various banks, and thus affords endless
opportunities for oppression." 

This recommendation is in accordance with the legislation or practice of other
countries. The Bank of England, the Bank of France, the National Bank of
Belgium, and the leading banks of Scotland all exclude from their boards
persons who are du'ectors in other banks. By law, in Russia no person is
allowed to be on the board of management of more than one bank. 

The Committee's recommendation is also in harmony with laws enacted by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts more than a generation ago designed to curb
financial concentration through the savings banks. Of the great wealth of
Massachusetts a large part is represented by deposits in its savings banks.
These deposits are distributed among 194 different banks, located in 131
different cities and towns. These 194 banks are separate and distinct; not
only in form, but in fact. In order that the banks may not be controlled by a
few financiers, the Massachusetts law provides that no executive oflScer or
trustee (director) of any savings bank can hold any office in any other savings
bank. That statute was passed in 1876. A few years ago it was supplemented by
providing that none of the executive officers of a savings bank could hold a
similar office in any national bank. Massachusetts attempted thus to curb the
power of the individual financier; and no disadvantages are discernible. When
that Act was passed the aggregate deposits in its savings banks were
$243,340,642; the number of deposit accounts 739,289; the average deposit to
each person of the population $144. On November 1, 1912, the aggregate deposits
were $838,635,097.85; the number of deposit accounts 2,200,917; the average
deposit to each account $381.04. Massachusetts has shown that curbing the power
of the few, at least in this respect, is entirelyconsistent with efficiency and
with the prosperity of the whole people. 

2. State Banks and Trust Companies. The reason for prohibiting common directors
in banking institutions applies equally to national banks and to state banks
including those trust companies which are essentially banks. In New York City
there are 37 trust companies of which only 15 are members of the clearing
house; but those 15 had on November 2, 1912, aggregate resources of
$827,875,653. Indeed the Bankers' Trust Company with resources of $205,000,000,
and the Guaranty Trust Company, with resources of $232,000,000, are among the
most useful tools of the Money Trust. No bank in the country has larger
deposits than the latter; and only one bank larger deposits than the former. If
common directorships were permitted in state banks or such trust companies, the
charters of leading national banks would doubtless soon be surrendered; and the
institutions would elude federal control by re-incorporating under state laws. 

The Pujo Committee has failed to apply the prohibition of common directorships
in potentially competing banking institutions rigorously even to national
banks. It permits the same man to be a director in one national bank and one
trust company doing business in the same place. The proposed concession opens
the door to grave dangers. In the first place the provision would permit the
interlocking of any national bank not with one trust company only, but with as
many trust companies as the bank has du'ectors. For while under the Pujo bill
no one can be a national bank director who is director in more than one such
trust company, there is nothing to prevent each of the directors of a bank from
becoming a director in a different trust company. The National Bank of Commerce
of New York has a board of 38 directors. There are 37 trust companies in the
City of New York. Thirty-seven of the 38 directors might each become a director
of a different New York trust company: and thus 37 trust companies would be
interlocked with the National Bank of Commerce, unless the other recommendation
of the Pujo Committee limiting the number of directors to 13 were also adopted. 

But even if the bill were amended so as to limit the possible interlocking of a
bank to a single trust company, the wisdom of the concession would still be
doubtful. It is true, as the Pujo Committee states, that "the business that
may be transacted by" a trust company is of "a, different character" from that
properly transacted by a national bank. But the business actually conducted by
a trust company is, at least in the East, quite similar; and the two classes of
banking institutions have these vital elements in common: each is a bank of
deposit, and each makes loans from its deposits. A private banker may also
transact some business of a character different from that properly conducted by
a bank; but by the terms of the Committee's bill a private banker engaged in
the business of receiving deposits would be prevented from being a director of
a national bank; and the reasons underlying that prohibition apply equally to
trust companies and to private bankers. 

3. Other Corporations. The interlocking of banking institutions is only one of
the factors which have developed the Money Trust. The interlocking of other
corporations has been an equally important element. And the prohibition of
interlocking directorates should be extended to potentially competing
corporations whatever the class; to life insurance companies, railroads and
industrial companies, as well as banking institutions. The Pujo Committee has
shown that Mr. George F. Baker is a common director in the six railroads which
haul 80 per cent, of all anthracite marketed and own 88 per cent, of all
anthracite deposits. The Morgan associates are the nexus between such
supposedly competing railroads as the Northern Pacific and the Great Northern;
the Southern, the Louisville & Nashville and the Atlantic Coast Line, and
between partially competing industrials like the Wcstinghouse Electric and
Manufacturing Company and the General Electric. The ?iexus between all the
large potentially competing corporations must be severed, if the Money Trust is
to be broken. 

PROHIBITING CORPORATE CONTRACTS IN WHICH THE MANAGEMENT HAS A PRIVATE INTEREST 

The principle of prohibiting corporate contracts in which the management has a
private interest is applied, in the Pujo Committee's recommendations, only to
national banks, and in them only to officers. All other corporations are to be
permitted to continue the practice; and even in national banks the directors
are to be free to have a conflicting private interest, except that they must
not accept compensation for promoting a loan of bank funds nor participate in
syndicates, promotions or underwriting of securities in which their banks may
be interested as underwriters or owners or lenders thereon: that all loans or
other transactions in which a director is interested shall be made in his own
name; and shall be authorized only after ample notice to co-directors; and that
the facts shall be spread upon the records of the corporation. 

The Money Trust would not be disturbed by a prohibition limited to officers.
Under a law of that character, financial control would continue to be exercised
by the few without substantial impairment; but the power would be exerted
through a somewhat different channel. Bank officers are appointees of the
directors; and ordinarily their obedient servants. Individuals who, as bank
officers, are now important factors in the financial concentration, would
doubtless resign as officers and become merely directors. 

The loss of official salaries involved could be easily compensated. No member
of the firm of J. P. Morgan & Co. is an officer in any one of the thirteen
banking institutions with aggregate resources of $1,253,000,000, through which
as directors they carry on their vast operations. A prohibition limited to
officers would not affect the Morgan operations with these banking
institutions. If there were minority representation on bank boards (which the
Pujo Committee wisely advocates), such a provision might afford some protection
to stockholders through the vigilance of the minority directors preventing the
dominant directors using their power to the injury of the minority
stockholders. But even then, the provision would not safeguard the public; and
the primary purpose of Money Trust legislation is not to prevent directors from
injuring stockholders; but to prevent their injuring the pubhc through the
intertwined control of the banks. No prohibition limited to officers will
materially change this condition. 

The prohibition of interlocking directorates, even if applied only to all banks
and trust companies, would practically compel the Morgan representatives to
resign from the directorates of the thirteen banking institutions with which
they are connected, or from the directorates of all the railroads, express,
steamship, public utility, manufacturing, and other corporations which do
business with those banks and trust companies. Whether they resigned from the
one or the other class of corporations, the endless chain would be broken into
many pieces. And whether they retired or not, the Morgan power would obviously
be greatly lessened: for if they did not retire, their field of operations
would be greatly narrowed. 

APPLY THE PRIVATE INTEREST PROHIBITION TO ALL KINDS OF CORPORATIONS 

The creation of the Money Trust is due quite as much to the encroachment of the
investment banker upon railroads, public service, industrial, and
life-insurance companies, as to his control of banks and trust companies.
Before the Money Trust can be broken, all these relations must be severed. And
they cannot be severed unless corporations of each of these several classes are
prevented from dealing with their own directors and with corporations in which
those directors are interested. For instance: The most potent single source of
J. P. Morgan & Co.'s power is the $162,500,000 deposits, including those of 78
interstate railroad, public-service and industrial corporations, which the
Morgan firm is free to use as it sees fit. The proposed proliibition, even if
applied to all banking institutions, would not afifect directly this great
source of Morgan power. If, however, the prohibition is made to include
railroad, public-service, and industrial corporations, as well as banking
institutions, members of J. P. Morgan & Co. will quickly retire from
substantially all boards of directors. 

APPLY THE PRIVATE INTEREST PROHIBITION TO STOCKHOLDING INTERESTS 

The prohibition against one corporation entering into transactions with another
corporation in which one of its directors is also interested, should apply even
if his interest in the second corporation is merely that of stockholder. A
conflict of interests in a director may be just as serious where he is a
stockholder only in the second corporation, as if he were also a director. 

One of the annoying petty monopolies, concerning which evidence was taken by
the Pujo Committee, is the exclusive privilege granted to the American Bank
Note Company by the New York 8tock Exchange. A recent $60,000,000 issue of New
York City bonds was denied listing on the Exchange, because the city refused to
submit to an exaction of $55,800 by the American Company for engraving the
bonds, when the New York Bank Note Company would do the work equally well for
$44,500. As tending to explain this extraordinary monopoly, it was shown that
men prominent in the financial world were stockholders in the American Company.
Among the largest stockholders was Mr. Morgan, with 6,000 shares. No member of
the Morgan firm was a director of the American Company; but there was
sufficient influence exerted somehow to give the American Company the stock
exchange monopoly. 

The Pujo Committee, while failing to recommend that transactions in which a
director has a private interest be prohibited, recognizes that a stockholder's
interest of more than a certain size may be as potent an instrument of
influence as a direct personal interest; for it recommends that: 

"Borrowings, directly or indirectly by ... any corporation of the stock of
which he (a bank director) holds upwards of 10 per cent, from the bank of which
he is such director, should only be permitted, on condition that notice shall
have been given to his co-directors and that a full statement of the
transaction shall be entered upon the minutes of the meeting at which such loan
was authorized." 

As shown above, the particular provision for notice affords no protection to
the public; but if it did, its application ought to be extended to lesser
stock-holdings. Indeed it is difficult to fix a limit so low that financial
interest will not influence action. Certainly a stockholding interest of a
single director, much smaller than 10 per cent., might be most effective in
inducing favors. Mr. Morgan's stockholdings in the American Bank Note Company
was only three per cent. The $6,000,000 investment of J. P. Morgan & Co. in
the National City Bank represented only 6 per cent, of the bank's stock; and
would undoubtedly have been effective, even if it had not been supplemented by
the election of his son to the board of directors. 

SPECIAL DISQUALIFICATIONS 

The Stanley Committee, after investigation of the Steel Trust, concluded that
the evils of interlocking directorates were so serious that representatives of
certain industries which arc largely dependent upon railroads should be
absolutely prohibited from serving as railroad directors, officers or
employees. It, therefore, proposed to disqualify as railroad director, officer
or employee any person engaged in the business of manufacturing or selling
railroad cars or locomotives, railroad rail or structural steel, or in mining
and selling coal. The drastic Stanley bill, shows how great is the desire to do
away with present abuses and to lessen the power of the Money Trust. 

Directors, officers, and employees of banking institutions should, by a similar
provision, be disqualified from acting as directors, officers or employees of
life-insurance companies. The Armstrong investigation showed that
life-insurance companies were in 1905 the most potent factor in financial
concentration. Their power was exercised largely through the banks and trust
companies which they controlled by stock ownership and their huge deposits. The
Armstrong legislation directed life-insurance companies to sell their stocks.
The Mutual Life and the Equitable did so in part. But the Morgan associates
bought the stocks. And now, instead of the life-insurance companies controlling
the banks and trust companies, the latter and the bankers control the
life-insurance companies. 

HOW THE PROHIBITION MAT BE LIMITED 

The Money Trust cannot be destroyed unless all classes of corporations are
included in the prohibition of interlocking directors and of transactions by
corporations in which the management has a private interest. But it does not
follow that the prohibition must apply to every corporation of each class.
Certain exceptions are entirely consistent with merely protecting the public
against the Money Trust; although protection of minority stockholders and
business ethics demand that the rule prohibiting a corporation from making
contracts in which a director has a private financial interest should be
universal in its application. The number of corporations in the United States
Dec. 31, 1912, was 305,336. Of these only 1610 have a capital of more than
$5,000,000. Few corporations (other than banks) with a capital of less than
$5,000,000 could appreciably affect general credit conditions either through
their own operations or their affiliations. Corporations (other than banks)
with capital resources of less than $5,000,000 might, therefore, be excluded
from the scope of the statute for the present. The prohibition could also be
limited so as not to apply to any industrial concern, regardless of the amount
of capital and resources, doing only an intrastate business; as practically all
large industrial corporations are engaged in interstate commerce. This would
exclude some retail concerns and local jobbers and manufacturers not otherwise
excluded from the operation of the act. Likewise banks and trust companies
located in cities of less than 100,000 inhabitants might, if thought advisable,
be excluded, for the present if their capital is less than S500,000, and their
resources less than, say, $2,500,000. In larger cities even the smaller banking
institutions should be subject to the law. Such exceptions should overcome any
objection which might be raised that in some smaller cities, the prohibition of
interlocking directorates would exclude from the bank directorates all the able
business men of the community through fear of losing the opportunity of bank
accommodations. 

An exception should also be made, so as to permit interlocking directorates
between a corporation and its proper subsidiaries. And the prohibition of
transactions in which the management has a private interest should, of course,
not apply to contracts, express or implied, for such services as are performed
indiscriminately for the whole community by raih-oads and public service
corporations, or for services, common to all customers, like the ordinary
service of a bank for its depositors. 

THE POWER OF CONGRESS 

The question may be asked: Has Congress the power to impose these limitations
upon the conduct of any business other than national banks? And if the power of
Congress is so limited, will not the dominant financiers, upon the enactment of
such a law, convert their national banks into state banks or trust companies,
and thus escape from congressional control? 

The answer to both questions is clear. Congress has ample power to impose such
prohibitions upon practically all corporations, including state banks, trust
companies and life insurance companies; and evasion may be made impossible.
While Congress has not been granted power to regulate directly state banks, and
trust or life insurance companies, or railroad, public-service and industrial
corporations, except in respect to interstate commerce, it may do so indirectly
by virtue either of its control of the mail privilege or through the taxing
power. 

Practically no business in the United States can be conducted without use of
the mails; and Congress may in its reasonable discretion deny the use of the
mail to any business which is conducted under conditions deemed by Congress to
be injurious to the public welfare. Thus, Congress has no power directly to
suppress lotteries ; but it has indirectly suppressed them by denying, under
heavy penalty, the use of the mail to lottery enterprises. Congress has no
power to suppress directly business frauds; but it is constantly doing so
indirectly by issuing fraud-orders denying the mail privilege. Congress has no
direct power to require a newspaper to publish a list of its proprietors and
the amount of its circulation, or to require it to mark paidmatter distinctly
as advertising: But it has thus regulated the press, by denying the
second-class mail privilege, to all publications which fail to comply with the
requirements prescribed. 

The taxing power has been resorted to by Congress for like purposes: Congress
has no power to regulate the manufacture of matches, or the use of
oleomargarine; but it has suppressed the manufacture of the "white phosphorous"
match and has greatly lessened the use of oleomargarine by imposing heavy taxes
upon them. Congress has no power to prohibit, or to regulate directly the issue
of bank notes by state banks, but it indirectly prohibited their issue by
imposing a tax of ten per cent, upon any bank note issued by a state bank. 

The power of Congress over interstate commerce has been similarly utilized.
Congress cannot ordinarily provide compensation for accidents to employees or
undertake directly to suppress prostitution; but it has, as an incident of
regulating interstate commerce, enacted the Railroad Employers' Liability law
and the White Slave Law; and it has full power over the instrumentalities of
commerce, like the telegraph and the telephone. 

As such exercise of congressional power has been common for, at least, half a
century. Congress should not hesitate now to employ it where its exercise is
urgently needed. For a comprehensive prohibition of interlocking directorates
is an essential condition of our attaining the New Freedom. Such a law would
involve a great change in the relation of the leading banks and bankers to
other businesses. But it is the very purpose of Money Trust legislation to
effect a great change; and unless it does so, the power of our financial
oligarchy cannot be broken. 

But though the enactment of such a law is essential to the emancipation of
business, it will not alone restore industrial liberty. It must be supplemented
by other remedial measures. 

