CHAPTER V: WHAT PUBLICITY CAN DO 

Publicity is justly commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases.
Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants; electric light the most
efficient policeman. And publicity has already played an important part in the
struggle against the Money Trust. The Pujo Committee has, in the disclosure of
the facts concerning financial concentration, made a most important
contribution toward attainment of the New Freedom. The battlefield has been
surveyed and charted. The hostile forces have been located, counted and
appraised. That was a necessary first step — and a long one — towards relief.
The provisions in the Committee's bill concerning the incorporation of stock
exchanges and the statement to be made in connection with the listing of
securities would doubtless have a beneficent effect. But there should be a
further call upon publicity for service. That potent force must, in the
impending struggle, be utilized in many ways as a continuous remedial measure. 

WEALTH 

Combination and control of other people's money and of other people's
businesses. These are the main factors in the development of the Money Trust.
But the wealth of the investment banker is also a factor. And with the
extraordinary growth of his wealth in recent years, the relative importance of
wealth as a factor in financial concentration has grown steadily. It was wealth
which enabled Mr. Morgan, in 1910, to pay $3,000,000 for $51,000 par value of
the stock of the Equitable Life Insurance Society. His direct income from this
investment was limited by law to less than oneeighth of one per cent, a year;
but it gave legal control of $504,000,000, of assets. It was wealth which
enabled the Morgan associates to buy from the Equitable and the Mutual Life
Insurance Company the stocks in the several banking institutions, which, merged
in the Bankers' Trust Company and the Guaranty Trust Company, gave them control
of $357,000,000 deposits. It was wealth which enabled Mr. Morgan to acquire
his shares in the First National and National City banks, worth $21,000,000,
through which he cemented the triple alliance with those institutions. 

Now, how has this great wealth been accumulated? Some of it was natural
accretion. Some of it is due to special opportunities for investment wisely
availed of. Some of it is due to the vast extent of the bankers' operations.
Then power breeds wealth as wealth breeds power. But a main cause of these
large fortunes is the huge tolls taken by those who control the avenues to
capital and to investors. There has been exacted as toll literally "all that
the traffic will bear." 

EXCESSIVE BANKERS' COMMISSIONS 

The Pujo Committee was unfortunately prevented by lack of time from presenting
to the country the evidence covering the amounts taken by the investment
bankers as promoters' fees, underwriting commissions and profits. Nothing could
have demonstrated so clearly the power exercised by the bankers, as a schedule
showing the aggregate of these taxes levied within recent years. It would be
well worth while now to reopen the Money Trust investigation merely to collect
these data. But earlier investigations have disclosed some illuminating, though
sporadic facts. 

The syndicate which promoted the Steel Trust, took, as compensation for a few
weeks' work, securities yielding $62,500,000 in cash; and of this, J. P. Morgan
& Co. received for their services, as Syndicate Managers, $12,500,000, besides
their share, as syndicate subscribers, in the remaining $50,000,000. The Morgan
syndicate took for promoting the Tube Trust $20,000,000 common stock out of a
total issue of $80,000,000 stock (preferred and common). Nor were monster
commissions limited to trust promotions. More recently, bankers' syndicates
have, in many instances, received for floating preferred stocks of
recapitalized industrial concerns, one-third of all common stock issued,
besides a considerable sum in cash. And for the sale of preferred stock of well
established manufacturing concerns, cash commissions (or profits) of from 7 1/2
to 10 per cent, of the cash raised are often exacted. On bonds of high-class
industrial concerns, bankers' commissions (or profits) of from 5 to 10 points
have been common. 

Nor have these heavy charges been confined to industrial concerns. Even
railroad securities, supposedly of high grade, have been subjected to like
burdens. At a time when the New Haven's credit was still unimpaired, J. P.
Morgan & Co. took the New York, Westchester & Boston Railway first mortgage
bonds, guaranteed by the New Haven at 92 1/2; and they were marketed at 96 1/4.
They took the Portland Terminal Company bonds, guaranteed by the jNIaine
Central Railroad — a corporation of unquestionable credit — at about 88, and
these were marketed at 92. 

A large part of these underwriting commissions is taken by the great banking
houses, not for their services in selling the bonds, nor in assuming risks, but
for securing others to sell the bonds and incur risks. Thus when the Interboro
Railway — a most prosperous corporation — financed its recent §170,000,000 bond
issue, J. P. Morgan & Co. received a 3 per cent, commission, that is,
$5,100,000, practically for arranging that others should underwrite and sell
the bonds. 

The aggregate commissions or profits so taken by leading banking houses can
only be conjectured, as the full amount of their transactions has not been
disclosed, and the rate of commission or profit varies very widely. But the
Pujo Committee has supplied some interesting data bearing upon the subject:
Counting the issues of securities of interstate corporations only, J. P. Morgan
& Co. directly procured the public marketing alone or in conjunction with
others during the years 1902-1912, of $1,950,000,000. What the average
commission or profit taken by J. P. Morgan & Co. was we do not know; but we do
know that every one per cent, on that sum yields $19,500,000. Yet even that
huge aggregate of $1,950,000,000 includes only a part of the securities on
which commissions or profits were paid. It does not include any issue of an
intrastate corporation. It does not include any securities privately marketed.
It does not include any government, state or municipal bonds. It is to
exactions such as these that the wealth of the investment banker is in large
part due. And since this wealth is an important factor in the creation of the
power exercised by the Money Trust, we must endeavor to put an end to this
improper wealth getting, as well as to improper combination. The Money Trust is
so powerful and so firmly entrenched, that each of the sources of its undue
power must be effectually stopped, if we would attain the New Freedom. 

HOW SHALL EXCESSIVE CHARGES BE STOPPED? 

The Pujo Committee recommends, as a remedy for such excessive charges, that
interstate corporations be prohibited from entering into any agreements
creating a sole fiscal agent to dispose of their security issues; that the
issue of the securities of interstate railroads be placed under the supervision
of the Interstate Commerce Commission; and that their securities should be
disposed of only upon public or private competitive bids, or under regulations
to be prescribed by the Commission with full powers of investigation that will
discover and punish combinations which prevent competition in bidding. Some of
the state public-service commissions now exercise such power; and it may
possibly be wise to confer this power upon the interstate commission, although
the recommendation of the Hadley Railroad Securities Commission are to the
contrar3\ But the official regulation as proposed by the Pujo Committee would
be confined to railroad corporations; and the new security issues of other
corporations listed on the New York Stock Exchange have aggregated in the last
five years $4,525,404,025, which is more than cither the jailroad or the
municipal issues. Publicity ofrcrs, however, another and even more promising
remedy: a method of regulating bankers' charges which would apply automatically
to railroad, public-service and industrial corporations alike. 

The question may be asked: Why have these excessive charges been submitted to?
Corporations, which in the first instance bear the charges for capital, have,
doubtless, submitted because of banker-control; exercised directly through
interlocking directorates, or kindred relations, and indirectly through
combinations among bankers to suppress competition. But why have the investors
submitted, since ultimately all these charges are borne by the investors,
except so far as corporations succeed in shifting the burden upon the
community? The large army of small investors, constituting a substantial
majority of all security buyers, are entirely free from banker control. Their
submission is undoubtedly due, in part, to the fact that the bankers control
the avenues to recognizedly safe investments almost as fully as they do the
avenues to capital. But the investor's servility is due partly, also, to his
ignorance of the facts. Is it not probable that, if each investor knew the
extent to which the seciirity he buys from the banker is diluted by excessive
underwritings, commissions and profits, there would be a strike of capital
against these unjust exactions? 

THE STRIKE OF CAPITAL 

A recent British experience supports this view. In a brief period last spring
nine different issues, aggregating $135,840,000, were offered by syndicates on
the London market, and on the average only about 10 per cent, of these loans
was taken by the public. Money was "tight," but the rates of interest offered
were very liberal, and no one doubted that the investors were well supplied
with funds. The London Daily Mail presented an explanation: 

"The long series of rebuffs to new loans at the hands of investors reached a
climax in the ill success of the great Rothschild issue. It will remain a topic
of financial discussion for many days, and many in the city are expressing the
opinion that it may have a revolutionary effect upon the present system of loan
issuing and underwriting. The question being discussed is that the public have
become loth to subscribe for stock which they believe the underwriters can
afford, by reason of the commission they receive, to sell subsetjuontly at a
lower price than the issue price, and that the Stock Exchange has begun to
realize the public's attitude. The public sees in the underwriter not so much
one who insures that the loan shall be subscribed in return for its commission
as a middleman, who, as it were, has an opportunity of obtaining stock at a
lower price than the public in order that he may pass it off at a profit
subsequently. They prefer not to subscribe, but to await an opportunity of
dividing that profit. They feel that if, when these issues were made, the stock
were offered them at a more attractive price, there would be less need to pay
the underwriters so high commissions. It is another practical protest, if
indirect, against the existence of the middleman, which protest is one of the
features of present-day finance." 

PUBLICITY AS A EEMEDY 

Compel bankers when issuing securities to make public the commissions or
profits they are receiving. Let every circular letter, prospectus or
advertisement of a bond or stock show clearly what the banker received for his
middlemanservices, and what the bonds and stocks net the issuing corporation.
That is knowledge to which both the existing security holder and the
prospective purchaser is fairly entitled. If the bankers' compensation is
reasonable, considering the skill and risk involved, there can be no objection
to making it known. If it is not reasonable, the investor will "strike," as
investors seem to have done recently in England. 

Such disclosures of bankers' commissions or profits is demanded also for
another reason: It will aid the investor in judging of the safety of the
investment. In the marketing of securities there are two classes of risks: One
is the risk whether the banker (or the corporation) will find ready purchasers
for the bonds or stock at the issue price; the other whether the investor will
get a good article. The maker of the security and the banker are interested
chiefly in getting it sold at the issue price. The investor is interested
chiefly in buying a good article. The small investor relies almost exclusively
upon the banker for his knowledge and judgment as to the quality of the
security; and it is this which makes his relation to the banker one of
confidence. But at present, the investment banker occupies a position
inconsistent with that relation. The bankers' compensation should, of course,
vary according to the risk he assumes. Where there is a large risk that the
bonds or stock will not be promptly sold at the issue price, the underwriting
commission (that is the insurance premium) should be correspondingly large.
But the banker ought not to be paid more for getting investors to assume a
larger risk. In practice the banker gets the higher commission for underwriting
the weaker security, on the ground -that his own risk is greater. And the
weaker the security, the greater is the banker's incentive to induce his
customers to relieve him. Now the law should not undertake (except incidentally
in connection with railroads and public-service corporations) to fix bankers'
profits. And it should not seek to prevent investors from making bad bargains.
But it is now recognized in the simplest merchandising, that there should be
full disclosures. The archaic doctrine of caveat emptor is vanishing. The law
has begun to require publicity in aid of fair dealing. The Federal Pure Food
Law does not guarantee quality or prices; but it helps the buyer to judge of
quality by requiring disclosure of ingredients. Among the most important facts
to be learned for determining the real value of a seciirity is the amount of
water it contains. And any excessive amount paid to the banker for marketing a
security is water. Require a full disclosure to the investor of the amount of
commissions and profits paid; and not only will investors be put on their
guard, but bankers' compensation will tend to adjust itself automatically to
what is fair and reasonable. Excessive commissions — this form of unjustly
acquired wealth — will in large part cease.

REAL DISCLOSURE 

But the disclosure must be real. And it must be a disclosure to the investor.
It will not suffice to require merely the filing of a statement of facts with
the Commissioner of Corporations or with a score of other officials, federal
and state. That would be almost as ineffective as if the Pure Food Law required
a manufactm-er merely to deposit with the Department a statement of
ingredients, instead of requiring the label to tell the story. Nor would the
filing of a full statement with the Stock Exchange, if incorporated, as
provided by the Pujo Committee bill, be adequate. 

To be effective, knowledge of the facts must be actually brought home to the
investor, and this can best be done by requiring the facts to be stated in
good, large type in every notice, circular, letter and advertisement inviting
the investor to purchase. Compliance with this requirement should also be
obhgatory, and not something which the investor could waive. For the whole
public is interested in putting an end to the bankers' exactions. England
undertook, years ago, to protect its investors against the wiles of promoters,
by requiring a somewhat similar disclosure; but the British act failed, in
large measure of its purpose, partly because under it the statement of facts
was filed only with a public official, and partly because the investor could
waive the provision. And the British statute has now been changed in the latter
respect. 

DISCLOSE SYNDICATE PARTICULARS 

The required publicity should also include a disclosure of all participants in
an underwriting. It is a common incident of underwriting that no member of the
syndicate shall sell at less than the syndicate price for a definite period,
unless the syndicate is sooner dissolved. In other words, the bankers make, by
agreement, an artificial price. Often the agreement is probably illegal under
the Sherman Anti-Trust Law. This price maintenance is, however, not necessarily
objectionable. It may be entirely consistent with the general welfare, if the
facts are made known. But disclosure should include a list of those
participating in the underwriting so that the public may not be misled. The
investor should know whether his adviser is disinterested. Not long ago a
member of a leading banking house was undertaking to justify a commission taken
by his firm for floating a now favorite preferred stock of a manufacturing
concern. The bankers took for their services $250,000 in cash, besides
one-third of the common stock, amounting to about $2,000,000. "Of course," he
said, "that would have been too much if we could have kept it all for
ourselves; but we couldn't. We had to divide up a large part. There were
fiftyseven participants. "V\'Tiy, we had even to give $10,000 of stock to
(naming the president of a leading bank in the city where the business was
located). He might some day have been asked what he thought of the stock. If he
had shrugged his shoulders and said he didn't know, we might have lost many a
customer for the stock. We had to give him $10,000 of the stock to teach him
not to shrug his shoulders." 

Think of the effectiveness with practical Americans of a statement like this: 

A. B. & Co. 

Investment Bankers 

We have today secured substantial control of the successful machinery business
heretofore conducted by at, Illinois, which has been incorporated under the
name of the Excelsior Manufacturing Company with a capital of $10,000,000, of
which $5,000,000 is Preferred and $5,000,000 Common. 

As we have a large clientele of confiding customers, we were able to secure
from the owners an agreement for marketing the Preferred stock — we to fix a
price which shall net the owners in cash $95 a share. 

We offer this excellent stock to you at $100.73 per share. Our own commission
or profit will be only a little over $5.00 per share, or say, $250,000 cash,
besides $1,500,000 of the Common stock, which we received as a bonus. This cash
and stock commission we are to divide in various proportions with the following
participants in the underwriting syndicate: 

C. D. & Co., New York 

E. F. & Co., Boston 

L. M. & Co., Philadelphia 

I. K. & Co., New York 

O. P. & Co., Chicago 

Were such notices common, the investment bankers would "be worthy of their
hire," for only reasonable compensation would ordinarily be taken. 

For marketing the preferred stock, as in the case of Excelsior Manufacturing
Co. referred to above, investment bankers were doubtless essential, and as
middlemen they performed a useful service. But they used their strong position
to make an excessive charge. There are, however, many cases where the banker's
services can be altogether dispensed with; and where that is possible he should
be eliminated, not only for economy's sake, but to break up financial
concentration. 
