CHAPTER VII: BIG MEN AND LITTLE BUSINESS 

J. P. Morgan & Co. declare, in their letter to the Pujo Committee, that
"practically all the railroad and industrial development of this country has
taken place initially through the medium of the great banking houses." That
statement is entirely unfounded in fact. On the contrary nearly every such
contribution to our comfort and prosperity was "initiated" without their aid.
The "great banking houses" came into relation with these enterprises, either
after success had been attained, or upon "reorganization" after the possibility
of success had been demonstrated, but the funds of the hardy pioneers, who had
risked their all, were exhausted. 

This is true of our early railroads, of our early street railways, and of the
automobile; of the telegraph, the telephone and the wireless; of gas and oil;
of harvesting machinery, and of our steel industry; of the textile, paper and
shoe industries; and of nearly every other important branch of manufacture. The
initiation of each of these enterprises may properly be characterized as "great
transactions"; and the men who contributed the financial aid and business
management necessary for their introduction are entitled to share, equally with
inventors, in our gratitude for what has been accomplished. But the instances
are extremely rare where the original financing of such enterprises was
undertaken by investment bankers, great or small. It was usually done by some
common business man, accustomed to taking risks; or by some well-todo friend of
the inventor or pioneer, who was influenced largely by considerations other
than money-getting. Here and there you will find that banker-aid was given; but
usually in those cases it was a small local banking concern, not a "great
banking house" which helped to "initiate" the undertaking. 

RAILROADS 

We have come to associate the great bankers with railroads. But their part was
not conspicuous in the early history of the Eastern railroads; and in the
Middle West the experience was, to some extent, similar. The Boston & Maine
Railroad owns and leases 2,215 miles of line; but it is a composite of about
ICG separate railroad companies. The New Haven Railroad owns and leases 1,996
miles of line; but it is a composite of 112 separate railroad companies. The
necessary capital to build these little roads was gathered together, partly
through state, county or municipal aid; partly from business men or landholders
who sought to advance their special interests; partly from investors; and
partly from well-to-do public-spirited men, who wished to promote the welfare
of their particular communities. About seventy-five years after the first of
these railroads was built, J. P. Morgan & Co. became fiscal agent for all of
them by creating the New Haven-Boston & Maine monopoly. 

STEAMSHIPS 

The history of our steamship lines is similar. In 1807, Robert Fulton, with the
financial aid of Robert R. Livingston, a judge and statesman — not a banker —
demonstrated with the Claremont, that it was practicable to propel boats by
steam. In 1833 the three Cunard brothers of Halifax and 232 other persons —
stockholders of the Quebec and Halifax Steam Navigation Company — joined in
supplying about $80,000 to build the Royal William, — the first steamer to
cross the Atlantic. In 1902, many years after individual enterprises had
developed practically all the great ocean lines, J. P. Morgan & Co. floated
the International Mercantile Marine with its 852,744,000 of 4 1/2 bonds, now
selling at about 60, and $100,000,000 of stock (preferred and common) on which
no dividend has ever been paid. It was just sixty- two years after the first
regular line of transatlantic steamers — The Cunard — was founded that Mr.
Morgan organized the Shipping Trust. 

TELEGRAPH 

The story of the telegraph is similar. The money for developing Morse's
invention was supplied by his partner and co-worker, Alfred Vail. The initial
line (from Washington to Baltimore) was built with an appropriation of $30,000
made by Congress in 1843. Sixty-six years later J. P. Morgan & Co. became
bankers for the Western Union through financing its purchase by the American
Telephone & Telegraph Company. 

HARVESTING MACHINERY 

Next to railroads and steamships, harvesting machinery has probably been the
most potent factor in the development of America; and most important of the
harvesting machines was Cyrus H. McCormick's reaper. That made it possible to
increase the grain harvest twenty- or thirtyfold. No investment banker had any
part in introducing this great business man's invention. 

McCormick was without means; but William Butler Ogden, a railroad builder,
ex-Mayor and leading citizen of Chicago, supplied $25,000 with which the first
factory was built there in 1847. Fifty-five years later, J. P. Morgan & Co.
performed the service of combining the five great harvester companies, and
received a commission of $3,000,000. The concerns then consolidated as the
International Harvester Company, with a capital stock of $120,000,000, had,
despite their huge assets and earning power, been previously capitalized, in
the aggregate, at only $10,500,000 — strong evidence that in all the preceding
years no investment banker had financed them. Indeed, McCormick was as able in
business as in mechanical invention. Two years after Odgen paid him $25,000 for
a half interest in the business, McCormick bought it back for $50,000; and
thereafter, until his death in 1884, no one but members of the McCormick family
had any interest in the business. 

THE BANKER ERA 

It may be urged that railroads and steamships, the telegraph and harvesting
machinery were introduced before the accumulation of investment capital had
developed the investment banker, and before America's "great banking houses"
had been established; and that, consequently, it would be fairer to inquire
what services bankers had rendered in connection with later industrial
development. The firm of J. P. Morgan & Co. is fifty-five years old; Kuhn, Loeb
& Co. fiftysix years old; Lee, Higginson & Co. over fifty years; and Kidder,
Peabody & Co. forty-eight years; and yet the investment banker seems to have
had almost as little part in "initiating" the great improvements of the last
half century, as did bankers in the earlier period. 

STEEL 

The modern steel industry of America is fortyfive years old. The "great
bankers" had no part in initiating it. Andrew Carnegie, then already a man of
large means, introduced the Bessemer process in 18G8. In the next thirty years
our steel and iron industry increased greatly. By 1898 we had far outstripped
all competitors. America's production about equalled the aggregate of England
and Germany. We had also reduced costs so much that Europe talked of the
"American Peril." It was 1898, when J. P. Morgan & Co. took their first step in
forming the Steel Trust, by organizing the Federal Steel Company. Then followed
the combination of the tube mills into an $80,000,000 corporation, J. P.
Morgan & Co. taking for their syndicate services $20,000,000 of common stock.
About the same time the consolidation of the bridge and structural works, the
tin plate, the sheet steel, the hoop and other mills followed; and finally, in
1901, the Steel Trust was formed, with a capitalization of $1,402,000,000.
These combinations came thirty years after the steel industry had been
"initiated". 

THE TELEPHONE 

The telephone industry is less than forty years old. It is probably America's
greatest contribution to industrial development. The bankers had no part in
"initiating" it. The glory belongs to a simple, enthusiastic, warm-hearted,
business man of Haverhill, Massachusetts, who was willing to risk his own
money. H. N. Casson tells of this, most interestingly, in his "History of the
Telephone": 

"The only man who had money and dared to stake it on the future of the
telephone was Thomas Sanders, and he did this not mainly for business reasons.
Both he and Hubbard were attached to Bell primarily by sentiment, as Bell had
removed the blight of dumbness from Sanders' little son, and was soon to marry
Hubbard's daughter. Also, Sanders had no expectation, at first, that so much
money would be needed. He was not rich. His entire business, which was that of
cutting out soles for shoe manufacturers, was not at any time worth more than
thirtyfive thousand dollars. Yet, from 1874 to 1878, he had advanced
nine-tenths of the money that was spent on the telephone. The first five
thousand telephones, and more, were made with his money. And so many long,
expensive months dragged by before any relief came to Sanders, that he was
compelled, much against his will and his business judgment, to stretch his
credit within an inch of the breaking-point to help Bell and the telephone.
Desperately he signed note after note until he faced a total of one hundred and
ten thousand dollars. If the new 'scientific toy' succeeded, which he often
doubted, he would be the richest citizen in Haverhill; and if it failed, which
he sorely feared, he would be a bankrupt. 

Sanders and Hubbard were leasing telephones two by two, to business men who
previously had been using the private lines of the Western Union Telegraph
Company. This great corporation was at this time their natural and inevitable
enemy. It had swallowed most of its competitors, and was reaching out to
monopolize all methods of communication by wire. The rosiest hope that shone in
front of Sanders and Hubbard was that the Western Union might conclude to buy
the Bell patents, just as it had already bought many others. In one moment of
discouragement they had offered the telephone to President Orton, of the
Western Union, for $100,000; and Orton had refused it. 'What use,' he asked
pleasantly,' could this company make of an electrical toy?' 

"But besides the operation of its own wires, the Western Union was supplying
customers with various kinds of printing-telegraphs and dialtelegraphs, some of
which could transmit sixty words a minute. These accurate instruments, it
believed, could never be displaced by such a scientific oddity as the
telephone, and it continued to believe this until one of its subsidiary
companies — the Gold and Stock — reported that several of its machines had been
superseded by telephones. 

"At once the Western Union awoke from its indifference. Even this tiny nibbling
at its business must be stopped. It took action quickly, and organized the
'American Speaking-Telephone Company,' and with $300,000 capital, and with
three electrical inventors, Edison, Gray, and Dolbear, on its staff. With all
the bulk of its great wealth and prestige, it swept down upon Bell and his
little body-guard. It trampled upon Bell's patent with as Uttle concern as an
elephant can have when he tramples upon an ant's nest. To the complete
bewilderment of Bell, it coolly announced that it had the only original
telephone, and that it was ready to supply superior telephones with all the
latest improvements made by the original inventors — Dolbear, Gray, and Edison. 

"The result was strange and unexpected. The Bell group, instead of being driven
from the field, were at once lifted to a higher level in the business world.
And the Western Union, in the endeavor to protect its private lines, became
involuntarily a 'bell-wether' to lead capitalists in the direction of the
telephone." 

Even then, when financial aid came to the Bell enterprise, it was from
capitalists, not from bankers, and among these capitalists was William II.
Forbes (son of the builder of the Burlington) who became the first President of
the Bell Telephone Company. That was in 1878. More than twenty years later,
after the telephone had spread over the world, the great house of Morgan came
into financial control of the property. The American Telephone & Telegraph
Company was formed. The process of combination became active. Since January,
1900, its stock has increased from $25,886,300 to $344,606,400. In six years
(1906 to 1912), the Morgan associates marketed about $300,000,000 bonds of that
company or its subsidiaries. In that period the volume of business done by the
telephone companies had, of course, grown greatly, and the plant had to be
constantly increased; but the proceeds of these huge security issues were used,
to a large extent, in effecting combinations; that is, in buying out telephone
competitors; in buying control of the Western Union Telegraph Company; and in
buying up outstanding stock interests in semi-independent Bell companies. It is
these combinations which have led to the investigation of the Telephone Company
by the Department of Justice; and they are, in large part, responsible for the
movement to have the government take over the telephone business. 

ELECTRICAL MACHINERY 

The business of manufacturing electrical machinery and apparatus is only a
little over thirty years old. J. P. Morgan & Co. became interested early in
one branch of it; but their dominance of the business today is due, not to
their "initiating" it, but to their effecting a combination, and organizing
the General Electric Company in 1892. There were then three large electrical
companies, the Thomson-Houston, the Edison and the Westinghouse, besides some
small ones. The Thomson-Houston of Lynn, Massachusetts, was in many respects
the leader, having been formed to introduce, among other things, important
inventions of Prof. Elihu Thomson and Prof. Houston. L3'nn is one of the
principal shoe-manufacturing centers of America. It is within ten miles of
State Street, Boston; but Thomson's early financial support came not from
Boston bankers, but mainly from Lynn business men and investors; men active,
energetic, and used to taking risks with their own money. Prominent among them
was Charles A. Coffin, a shoe manufacturer, who became connected with the
Thomson-Ht)uston Company upon its organization and president of the General
Electric when Mr. Morgan formed that company in 1892, by combining the
Thomson-Houston and the Edison. To his continued service, supported by other
Thomson-Houston men in high positions, the great prosperity of the company is,
in large part, due. The two companies so combined controlled probably one-half
of all electrical patents then existing in America; and certainly more than
half of those which had any considerable value. 

In 1896 the General Electric pooled its patents with the Westinghouse, and thus
competition was further restricted. In 1903 the General Electric absorbed the
Stanley Electric Company, its other large competitor; and became the largest
manufacturer of electric apparatus and machinery in the world. In 1912 the
resources of the Company were $131,942,144. It billed sales to the amount of
$89,182,185. It employed directly over 60,000 persons, — more than a fourth as
many as the Steel Trust. And it is protected against "undue" competition; for
one of the Morgan partners has been a director, since 1909, in the
Westinghouse, — the only other large electrical machinery company in America. 

THE AUTOMOBILE 

The automobile industry is about twenty years old. It is now America's most
prosperous business. When Henry B. Joy, President of the Packard Motor Car
Company, was asked to what extent the bankers aided in "initiating" the
automobile, he replied: 

"It is the observable facts of history, it is also my experience of thirty
years as a business man, banker, etc., that first the seer conceives an
opportunity. He has faith in his almost second sight. He believes he can do
something — develop a business — construct an industry — build a railroad — or
Niagara Falls Power Company, — and make it pay! 

"Now the human measure is not the actual physical construction, but the 'make
it pay'! 

"A man raised the money in the late '90s and built a beet sugar factory in
Michigan. Wiseacres said it was nonsense. He gathered together the money from
his friends who would take a chance with him. He not only built the sugar
factory (and there was never any doubt of his ability to do that) but he made
it pay. The next year two more sugar factories were built, and were financially
successful. These were built by private individuals of wealth, taking chances
in the face of cries of doubting bankers and trust companies. 

"Once demonstrated that the industry was a sound one financially and then
bankers and trust companies would lend the new sugar companies which were
speedily organized a large part of the necessary funds to construct and
operate. 

"The motor-car business was the same. 

"When a few gentlemen followed me in my vision of the possibilities of the
business, the banks and older business men (who in the main were the banks)
said, 'fools and their money soon to be parted' — etc., etc. 

"Private capital at first establishes an industry, backs it through its
troubles, and, if possible, wins financial success when banks would not lend a
dollar of aid. 

"The business once having proved to be practicable and financially successful,
then do the banks lend aid to its needs." 

Such also was the experience of the greatest of the many financial successes in
the automobile industry — the Ford Motor Company. 

HOW BANKERS ARREST DEVELOPMENT 

But "great banking houses" have not merely failed to initiate industrial
development; they have definitely arrested development because to them the
creation of the trusts is largely due. The recital in the Memorial addressed
to the President by the Investors' Guild in November, 1911, is significant: 

"It is a well-known fact that modern trade combinations tend strongly toward
constancy of process and products, and by their very nature are opposed to new
processes and new products originated by independent inventors, and hence tend
to restrain competition in the development and sale of patents and patent
rights; and consequently tend to discourage independent inventive thought, to
the great detriment of the nation, and with injustice to inventors whom the
Constitution especially intended to encourage and protect in their rights." 

And more specific was the testimony of the 

Engineering News: 

"We are today something like five years behind Germany in iron and steel
metallurgy, and such innovations as arc being introduced by our iron and steel
manufacturers are most of them merely following the lead set by foreigners
years ago. 

"We do not believe this is because American engineers are any less ingenious or
original than those of Europe, though they may indeed be deficient in training
and scientific education compared with those of Germany. We beheve the main
cause is the wholesale consohdation which has taken place in American industry.
A huge organization is too clumsy to take up the development of an original
idea. With the market closely controlled and profits certain by following
standard methods, those who control our trusts do not want the bother of
developing anything new. 

"We instance metallurgy only by way of illustration. There are plenty of other
fields of industry where exactly the same condition exists. We are building the
same machines and using the same methods as a dozen years ago, and the real
advances in the art are being made by European inventors and manufacturers." 

To which President Wilson's stateijent may be added: 

"I am not saying that all invention had been stopped by the growth of trusts,
but I think it is perfectly clear that invention in many fields has been
discouraged, that inventors have been prevented from reaping the full fruits of
their ingenuity and industry, and that mankind has been deprived of many
comforts and conveniences, as well as the opportunity of buying at lower
prices. 

"Do you know, have you had occasion to learn, that there is no hospitality for
invention, now-a-days?" 

TRUSTS AND FINANCIAL CONCENTRATION 

The fact that industrial monopolies arrest development is more serious even
than the direct burden imposed through extortionate prices. But the most
harm-bearing incident of the trusts is their promotion of financial
concentration. Industrial trusts feed the money trust. Practically every trust
created has destroyed the financial independence of some communities and of
many properties; for it has centered the financing of a large part of whole
lines of business in New York, and this usually with one of a few banking
houses. This is well illustrated by the Steel Trust, which is a trust of
trusts; that is, the Steel Trust combines in one huge holding company the
trusts previously formed in the different branches of the steel business. Thus
the Tube Trust combined 17 tube mills, located in 16 different cities,
scattered over 5 states and owned by 13 different companies. The wire trust
combined 19 mills; the sheet steel trust 26; the bridge and structural trust
27; and the tin plate trust 36; all scattered similarly over many states.
Finally these and other companies were formed into the United States Steel
Corporation, combining 228 companies in all, located in 127 cities and towns,
scattered over 18 states. Before the combinations were effected, nearly every
one of these companies was owned largely by those who managed it, and had been
financed, to a large extent, in the place, or in the state, in which it was
located. When the Steel Trust was formed all these concerns came under one
management. Thereafter, the financing of each of these 228 corporations (and
some which were later acquired) had to be done through or with the consent of
J. P. Morgan & Co. That was the greatest step in financial concentration ever
taken. 

STOCK EXCHANGE INCIDENTS 

The organization of trusts has served in another way to increase the power of
the Money Trust. Few of the independent concerns out of which the trusts have
been formed, were listed on the New York Stock Exchange; and few of them had
financial offices in New York. Promoters of large corporations, whose stock is
to be held by the public, and also investors, desire to have their securities
listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Under the rules of the Exchange, no
security can be so listed unless the corporation has a transfer agent and
registrar in New York City. Furthermore, banker-directorships have contributed
largely to the establishment of the financial offices of the trusts in New York
City. That alone would tend to financial concentration. But the listing of the
stock enhances the power of the Money Trust in another way. An industrial
stock, once listed, frequently becomes the subject of active speculation; and
speculation feeds the Money Trust indirectly in many ways. It draws the money
of the country to New York. The New York bankers handle the loans of other
people's money on the Stock Exchange; and members of the Stock Exchange receive
large amounts from commissions. For instance: There are 5,084,952 shares of
United States Steel common stock outstanding. But in the five years ending
December 31, 1912, speculation in that stock was so extensive that there were
sold on the Exchange an average of 29,380,888 shares a year; or nearly six
times as much as there is Steel common in existence. Except where the
transactions are by or for the brokers, sales on the Exchange involve the
payment of twentyfive cents in commission for each share of stock sold; that
is, twelve and one-half cents by the seller and twelve and one-half cents by
the buyer. Thus the commission from the Steel common alone afforded a revenue
averaging many millions a year. The Steel preferred stock is also much traded
in; and there are 138 other industrials, largely trusts, listed on the New York
Stock Exchange. 

TRUST RAMIFICATIONS 

But the potency of trusts as a factor in financial concentration is manifested
in still other ways; notably through their ramifying operations. This is
illustrated forcibly by the General Electric Company's control of water-power
companies which has now been disclosed in an able report of the United States
Bureau of Corporations: 

*'The extent of the General Electric influence is not fully revealed by its
consolidated balance sheet. A very large number of corporations are connected
with it through its subsidiaries and through corporations controlled by these
subsidiaries or affiliated with them. There is a still wider circle of
influence due to the fact that officers and directors of the General Electric
Co. and its subsidiaries are also officers or directors of many other
corporations, some of whose securities are owned by the General Electric
Company. 

"The General Electric Company holds in the first place all the common stock in
three security holding companies : the United Electric Securities Co., the
Electrical Securities Corporation, and the Electric Bond and Share Co. Directly
and through these corporations and their officers the General Electric controls
a large part of the water power of the United States. 

... "The water-power companies in the General Electric group are found in 18
States. These 18 States have 2,325,757 commercial horsepower developed or under
construction, and of this total the General Electric group includes 939,115 h.
p. or 40.4 per cent. The greatest amount of power controlled by the companies
in the General Electric group in any State is found in Washington. This is
followed by New York, Pennsylvania, California, Montana, Iowa, Oregon, and
Colorado. In five of the States shown in the table the water-power companies
included in the General Electric group control more than 50 per cent, of the
commercial power, developed and under construction. The percentage of power in
the States included in the General Electric group ranges from a little less
than 2 per cent, in Michigan to nearly 80 per cent, in Pennsylvania. In
Colorado they control 72 per cent.; in New Hampshire 61 per cent. ; in Oregon
58 per cent. ; and in Washington 55 per cent. 

Besides the power developed and under construction water-power concerns
included in the General Electric group own in the States shown in the table
641,600 h. p. undeveloped." 

This water power control enables the General Electric group to control other
public service corporations : 

"The water-power companies subject to General Electric influence control the
street railways in at least 16 cities and towns; the electric-light plants in
78 cities and towns; gas plants in 19 cities and towns; and are affiliated with
the electric hght and gas plants in other towns. Though many of these
communities, particularly those served with light only, are small, several of
them are the most important in the States where these water-power companies
operate. The water-power companies in the General Electric group own, control,
or are closely affiliated with, the street railways in Portland and Salem,
Ore.; Spokane, Wash.; Great Falls, Mont.; St. Louis, Mo.; Winona, Minn.;
Milwaukee and Racine, Wis.; Elmira, N. Y.; Ashcville and Raleigh, N. C., and
other relatively less important towns. The towns in which the lighting plants
(electric or gas) are owned or controlled include Portland, Salem, Astoria, and
other towns in Oregon; Bellingham and other towns in Washington; Butte, Great
Falls, Bozeman and other towns in Montana; Leadville and Colorado Springs in
Colorado; St. Louis, Mo.; Milwaukee, Racine and several small towns in
Wisconsin; Hudson and Rensselaer, N. Y.; Detroit, Mich.; Asheville and Raleigh,
N. C; and in fact one or more towns in practically every community where
developed water power is controlled by this group. In addition to the
public-service corporations thus controlled by the water-power companies
subject to General Electric influence, there are numerous public-service
corporations in other municipalities that purchase power from the hydroelectric
developments controlled by or affiliated with the General Electric Co. This is
true of Denver, Colo., which has already been discussed. In Baltimore, Md., a
water-power concern in the General Electric group, namely, the Pennsylvania
Water & Power Co., sells 20,000 h. p. to the Consolidated Gas, Electric Light &
Power Co., which controls the entire light and power business of that city. The
power to operate all the electric street railway systems of Buffalo, N. Y., and
vicinity, involving a trackage of approximately 375 miles, is supplied through
a subsidiary of the Niagara Falls Power Co." 

And the General Electric Company, through the financing of public service
companies, exercises a Hke influence in communities where there is no water
power: 

"It, or its subsidiaries, has acquired control of or an interest in the
public-service corporations of numerous cities where there is no water-power
connection, and it is affiliated with still others by virtue of common
directors. ...This vast network of relationship between hydro-electric
corporations through prominent officers and directors of the largest
manufacturer of electrical machinery and supplies in the United States is
highly significant. ... 

"It is possible that this relationship to such a large number of strong
financial concerns, through common officers and directors, affords the General
Electric Co. an advantage that may place rivals at a corresponding
disadvantage. Whether or not this great financial power has been used to the
particular disadvantage of any rival waterpower concern is not so important as
the fact that such power exists and that it might be so used at any time." 

THE SHERMAN LAW 

The Money Trust cannot be broken, if we allow its power to be constantly
augmented. To break the Money Trust, we must stop that power at its source.
The industrial trusts are among its most effective feeders. Those which are
illegal should be dissolved. The creation of new ones should be prevented. To
this end the Sherman Law should be supplemented both by providing more
efficient judicial machinery, and by creating a commission with administrative
functions to aid in enforcing the law. When that is done, another step will
have been taken toward securing the New Freedom. But restrictive legislation
alone will not suffice. We should bear in mind the admonition with which the
Commissioner of Corporations closes his review of our water power development: 

"There is ... presented such a situation in water powers and other public
utilities as might bring about at any time under a single management the
control of a majority of the developed water power in the United States and
similar control over the public utilities in a vast number of cities and towns,
including some of the most important in the country." 

We should conserve all rights which the Federal Government and the States now
have in our natural resources, and there should be a complete separation of our
industries from railroads and public utilities. 
