CHAPTER X THE INEFFICIENCY OF THE OLIGARCHS 

We must break the Money Trust or the Money Trust will break us. 

The Interstate Commerce Commission said in its report on the most disastrous of
the recent wrecks on the New Haven Railroad: 

"On this directorate were and are men whom the confiding public recognize as
magicians in the art of finance, and wizards in the construction, operation,
and consolidation of great systems of railroads. The public therefore rested
secure that with the knowledge of the railroad art possessed by such men
investments and travel should both be safe. Experience has shown that this
reliance of the public was not justified as to either finance or safety." 

This failure of banker-management is not surprising. The surprise is that men
should have supposed it would succeed. For bankermanagement contravenes the
fundamental laws of human limitations: First, that no man can serve two
masters; second, that a man cannot at the same time do many things well. 

SEEMING SUCCESSES 

There are numerous seeming exceptions to these rules; and a relatively few real
ones. Of course, many banker-managed properties have been prosperous; some for
a long time, at the expense of the public; some for a shorter time, because of
the impetus attained before they were banker-managed. It is not difficult to
have a large net income, where one has the field to oneself, has all the
advantages privilege can give, and may "charge all the traffic will bear." And
even in competitive business the success of a long-established, well-organized
business with a widely extended good-will, must continue for a considerable
time; especially if buttressed by intertwined relations constantly giving it
the preference over competitors. The real test of efficiency comes when success
has to be struggled for; when natural or legal conditions limit the charges
which may be made for the goods sold or service rendered. Our bankermanaged
railroads have recently been subjected to such a test, and they have failed to
pass it. 

"It is only," says Goethe, "when working within limitations, that the master is
disclosed." 

WHY OLIGARCHY FAILS 

Banker-management fails, partly because the private interest destroys soundness
of judgment and undermines loyalty. It fails partly, also, because banker
directors are led by their occupation (and often even by the mere fact of their
location remote from the operated properties) to apply a false test in making
their decisions. Prominent in the banker-director mind is always this thought:
*'What will be the probable effect of our action upon the market value of the
company's stock and bonds, or, indeed, generally upon stock exchange values?"
The stock market is so much a part of the investment-banker's life, that he
cannot help being affected by this consideration, however disinterested he may
be. The stock market is sensitive. Facts are often misinterpreted "by the
street" or by investors. And with the best of intentions, directors susceptible
to such influences are led to unwise decisions in the effort to prevent
misinterpretations. Thus, expenditures necessary for maintenance, or for the
ultimate good of a property are often deferred by banker-directors, because of
the belief that the making of them now, would (by showing smaller net
earnings), create a bad, and even false, impression on the market.  Dividends
are paid which should not be, because of the efifect which it is believed
reduction or suspension would have upon the market value of the company's
securities. To excerise a sound judgment in the difficult affairs of business
is, at best, a delicate operation. And no man can successfully perform that
function whose mind is diverted, however innocently, from the study of, "what
is best in the long run for the company of which I am director?" The
banker-director is peculiarly liable to such distortion of judgment by reason
of his occupation and his environment. But there is a further reason why,
ordinarily, banker-management must fail. 

THE ELEMENT OF TIME 

The banker, with his multiplicity of interests, cannot ordinarily give the time
essential to proper supervision and to acquiring that knowledge of the facts
necessary to the exercise of sound judgment. The Century Dictionary tells us
that a Director is "one who directs; one who guides, superintends, governs and
manages." Real efficiency in any business in which conditions are ever changing
must ultimately depend, in large measure, upon the correctness of the judgment
exercised, almost from day to day, on the important problems as they arise. And
how can the leading bankers, necessarily engrossed in the problems of their own
vast private businesses, get time to know and to correlate the facts concerning
so many other complex businesses? Besides, they start usually with ignorance of
the particular business which they are supposed to direct. When the last paper
was signed which created the Steel Trust, one of the lawyers (as Mr.  Perkins
frankly tells us) said: "That signature is the last one necessary to put the
Steel industry, on a large scale, into the hands of men who do not know
anything about it." 

AVOCATIONS OF THE OLIGARCHS 

The New Haven System is not a railroad, but an agglomeration of a railroad plus
121 separate corporations, control of which was acquired by the New Haven after
that railroad attained its full growth of about 2000 miles of line. In
administering the railroad and each of the properties formerly managed through
these 122 separate companies, there must arise from time to time difficult
questions on which the directors should pass judgment. The real managing
directors of the New Haven system during the decade of its decline were: J.
Pierpont Morgan, George F. Baker, and William Rockefeller. Mr. Morgan was,
until his death in 1913, the head of perhaps the largest banking house in the
world. Mr. Baker was, until 1909, President and then Chairman of the Board of
Directors of one of America's leading banks (the First National of New York),
and I\Ir. Rockefeller was, until 1911, President of the Standard Oil Company.
Each was well advanced in years. Yet each of these men, besides the duties of
his own vast business, and important private interests, undertook to "guide,
superintend, govern and manage," not only the New Haven but also the following
other corporations, some of which were similarly complex: Mr. Morgan, 48
corporations, including 40 railroad corporations, with at least 100 subsidiary
companies, and 16,000 miles of line; 3 banks and trust or insurance companies;
5 industrial and public-service companies. Mr. Baker, 48 corporations,
including 15 railroad corporations, with at least 158 subsidiaries, and 37,400
miles of track; 18 banks, and trust or insurance companies; 15 public-service
corporations and industrial concerns. Mr. Rockefeller, 37 corporations,
including 23 railroad corporations with at least 117 subsidiary companies, and
26,400 miles of line; 5 banks, trust or insurance companies; 9 public service
companies and industrial concerns. 

SUBSTITUTES 

It has been urged that in view of the heavy burdens which the leaders of
finance assume in directing Business- America, we should be patient of error
and refrain from criticism, lest the leaders be deterred from continuing to
perform this public service. A very respectable Boston daily said a few days
after Commissioner McChord's report on the North Haven wreck: 

"It is believed that the New Haven pillory repeated with some frequency will
make the part of railroad director quite undesirable and hard to fill, and more
and more avoided by responsible men. Indeed it may even become so that men will
have to be paid a substantial salary to compensate them in some degree for the
risk involved in being on the board of directors." 

But there is no occasion for alarm. The American people have as little need of
oligarchy in business as in politics. There are thousands of men in America who
could have performed for the New Haven stockholders the task of one "who
guides, superintends, governs and manages," better than did Mr. IMorgan. Mr.
Baker and IVIr. Rockefeller. For though possessing less native ability even the
average business man would have done better than they, because working under
proper conditions. There is great strength in serving with singleness of
purpose one master only. There is great strength in having time to give to a
business the attention which its difficult problems demand. And tens of
thousands more Americans could be rendered competent to guide our important
businesses. Liberty is the greatest developer. Herodotus tells us that while
the tyrants ruled, the Athenians were no better fighters than their neighbors;
but when freed, they immediately surpassed all others. If industrial democracy
— true cooperation — should be substituted for industrial absolutism, there
would be no lack of industrial leaders. 

ENGLAND'S BIG BUSINESS

England, too, has big business. But her big business is the Cooperative
Wholesale Society, with a wonderful story of 50 years of beneficent growth. Its
annual turnover is now about $150,000,000 — an amount exceeded by the sales of
only a few American industrials; an amount larger than the gross receipts of
any American railroad, except the Pennsylvania and the New York Central
systems. Its business is very diversified, for its purpose is to supply the
needs of its members. It includes that of wholesale dealer, of manufacturer, of
grower, of miner, of banker, of insurer and of carrier. It operates the biggest
flour mills and the biggest shoe factory in all Great Britain. It manufactures
woolen cloths, all kinds of men's, women's and children's clothing, a dozen
kinds of prepared foods, and as many household articles. It operates
creameries. It carries on every branch of the printing business. It is now
buying coal lands. It has a bacon factory in Denmark, and a tallow and oil
factory in Australia. It grows tea in Ceylon. And through all the purchasing
done by the Society runs this general principle: Go direct to the source of
production, whether at home or abroad, so as to save commissions of middlemen
and agents. Accordingly, it has buyers and warehouses in the United States,
Canada, Australia, Spain, Denmark and Sweden. It owns steamers plying between
Continental and English ports. It has an important banking department; it
insm-es the property and person of its members. Every one of these departments
is conducted in competition with the most efficient concerns in their
respective lines in Great Britain. The Cooperative Wholesale Society makes its
purchases, and manufactures its products, in order to supply the 1399 local
distributive, cooperative societies scattered over all England; but each local
society is at liberty to buy from the wholesale society, or not, as it chooses;
and they buy only if the Cooperative Wholesale sells at market prices. This the
Cooperative actually does; and it is able besides to return to the local a fair
dividend on its purchases. 

INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY 

Now, how are the directors of this great business chosen? Not by England's
leading bankers, or other notabilities, supposed to possess unusual wisdom; but
democratically, by all of the people interested in the operations of the
Society. And the number of such persons who have directly or indirectly a voice
in the selection of the directors of the English Cooperative Wholesale Society
is 2,750,000. For the directors of the Wholesale Society are elected by vote of
the delegates of the 1399 retail societies. And the delegates of the retail
societies are, in turn, selected by the members of the local societies; — that
is, by the consumers, on the principle of one man, one vote, regardless of the
amount of capital contributed. Note what kind of men these industrial democrats
select to exercise executive control of their vast organization. Not all-wise
bankers or their dummies, but men who have risen from the ranks of cooperation;
men who, by conspicuous service in the local societies have won the respect and
confidence of their fellows. The directors are elected for one year only; but a
director is rarely unseated. J. T. W. Mitchell was president of the Society
continuously for 21 years. Thirtytwo directors are selected in this manner.
Each gives to the business of the Society his whole time and attention; and the
aggregate salaries of the thirty-two is less than that of many a single
executive in American corporations; for these directors of England's big
business serve each for a salary of about $1500 a year. 

The Cooperative Wholesale Society of England is the oldest and largest of these
institutions. But similar wholesale societies exist in 15 other countries. The
Scotch Society (which William Maxwell has served most efficiently as President
for thirty years at a salary never exceeding $38 a week) has a turn-over of
more than $50,000,000 a year. 

A REMEDY FOR TRUSTS 

Albert Sonnichsen, General Secretary of the Cooperative League, tells in the
American Review of Reviews for April, 1913, how the Swedish Wholesale Society
curbed the Sugar Trust; how it crushed the Margerine Combine (compelling it to
dissolve after having lost 2,300,000 crowns in the struggle); and how in
Switzerland the Wholesale Society forced the dissolution of the Shoe
Manufacturers Association. He tells also this memorable incident: 

"Six years ago, at an international congress in Cremona, Dr. Hans Miillcr, a
Swiss delegate, presented a resolution by which an international wholesale
society should be created. Luigi Luzzatti, Italian Minister of State and an
ardent member of the movement, was in the chair. Those who were present say
Luzzatti paused, his eyes lighted up, then, dramatically raising his hand, he
said: *Dr. Miiller proposes to the assembly a great idea — that of opposing to
the great trusts, the Rockefellers of the world, a worldwide cooperative
alliance which shall become so powerful as to crush the trusts. ' " 

COOPERATION IN AMERICA 

America has no Wholesale Cooperative Societyable to grapple with the trusts.
But it has some very strong retail societies, like the Tamarack of Michigan,
which has distributed in dividends to its members $1,144,000 in 23 years. The
recent high cost of living has greatly stimulated interest in the cooperative
movement; and John Graham Brooks reports that we have already about 350 local
distributive societies. The movement toward federation is progressing. There
are over 100 cooperative stores in Minnesota, Wisconsin and other Northwestern
states, many of which were organized by or through the zealous work of Mr.
Tousley and his associates of the Right Relationship League and are in some
ways affihated. In New York City 83 organizations are affihated with the
Cooperative League. In New Jersey the societies have federated into the
American Cooperative Alliance of Northern New Jersey. In California, long the
seat of effective cooperative work, a central management committee is
developing. And progressive Wisconsin has recently legislated wisely to develop
cooperation throughout the state. 

Among our farmers the interest in cooperation is especially keen. The federal
government has just established a separate bui-eau of the Department of
Agriculture to aid in the study, development and introduction of the best
methods of cooperation in the working of farms, in buj'ing, and in
distribution; and special attention is now being given to farm credits — a
field of cooperation in which Continental Europe has achieved complete success,
and to which David Lubin, America's delegate to the International Institute of
Agriculture at Rome, has, among others, done much to direct our attention. 

PEOPLE'S SAVINGS BANKS

The German farmer has achieved democratic banking. The 13,000 little
cooperative credit associations, with an average membership of about 90
persons, are truly banks of the people, by the people and for the people. 

First: The banks' resom'ccs are of the people. These aggregate about
$500,000,000. Of this amount S375, 000,000 represents the farmers' savings
deposits; $50,000,000, the farmers' current deposits; $0,000,000, the farmers'
share capital; and $13,000,000, amounts earned and placed in the reserve. Thus,
nearly nine-tenths of these large resources belong to the farmers — that is, to
the members of the banks. 

Second: The banks are managed by the people — that is, the members. And
membership is easily attained; for the average amount of paidup share capital
was, in 1909, less than $5 per member. Each member has one vote regardless of
the number of his shares or the amount of his deposits. These members elect the
officers. The committees and trustees (and often even, the treasurer) serve
without pay : so that the expenses of the banks are, on the average, about $150
a year. 

Third: The banks are for the people. The farmers' money is loaned by the farmer
to the farmer at a low rate of interest (usually 4 per cent, to 6 per cent.);
the shareholders receiving, on their shares, the same rate of interest that the
borrowers pay on their loans. Thus the resources of all farmers are made
available to each farmer, for productive purposes. 

This democratic rural banking is not confined to Germany. As Henry W. Wolff
says in his book on cooperative banks: 

"Propagating themselves by their own merits, little people's cooperative banks
have overspread German}', Italy, Austria, Hungary, Switzerland, Belgium. Russia
is following up those countries; France is striving strenuously for the
possession of cooperative credit. Servia, Roumania, and Bulgaria have made such
credit their own. Canada has scored its first success on the road to its
acquisition. Cyprus, and even Jamaica, have made their first start. Ireland has
substantial first-fruits to show of her economic sowings. 

"South Africa is groping its way to the same goal. Egypt has discovered the
necessity of cooperative banks, even by the side of Lord Cromer's pet creation,
the richly endowed 'agricultural bank.' India has made a beginning full of
promise. And even in far Japan, and in China, people are trying to acclimatize
the more perfected organizations of SchulzeDelitzsch and Rafreisen. The entire
world seems girdled with a ring of cooperative credit. Only the United States
and Great Britain still lag lamentably behind." 

BANKERS' SAVINGS BANKS

The saving banks of America present a striking contrast to these democratic
banks. Our savings banks also have performed a great service. They have
provided for the people's funds safe depositories with some income return.
Thereby they have encouraged thrift and have created, among other things,
reserves for the proverbial "rainy day." They have also discouraged "old
stocking" hoarding, which diverts the money of the country from the channels of
trade. American savings banks are also, in a sense, banks oj the people; for it
is the people's money which is administered by them. The $4,500,000,000
deposits in 2,000 American savings banks belong to about ten million people,
who have an average deposit of about $450. But our savings banks are not banks
hy the people, nor, in the full sense, jor the people. 

First: American savings banks are not managed by the people. The stock-savings
banks, most prevalent in the Middle West and the South, are purely commercial
enterprises, managed, of course, by the stockholders' representatives. The
mutual savings banks, most prevalent in the Eastern states, have no
stockholders; but the depositors have no voice in the management. The banks are
managed by trustees /or the people, practically a self-constituted and
self-perpetuating body, composed of "leading" and, to a large extent,
public-spirited citizens. Among them (at least in the larger cities) there is
apt to be a predominance of investment bankers, and bank directors. Thus the
three largest savings banks of Boston (whose aggregate deposits exceed those of
the other 18 banks) have together 81 trustees. Of these, 52 are investment
bankers or directors in other Massachusetts banks or trust companies. 

Second: The funds of our savings banks (whether stock or purely mutual) are not
used mainly for the people. The depositors are allowed interest (usually from 3
to 4 per cent.). In the mutual savings banks they receive ultimately all the
net earnings. But the money gathered in these reservoirs is not used to aid
productively persons of the classes who make the deposits. The depositors are
largely wage earners, salaried people, or members of small tradesmen's
families. Statically the money is used for them. Dynamically it is used for the
capitalist. For rare, indeed, are the instances when savings banks moneys are
loaned to advance productively one of the depositor class. Such persons would
seldom be able to provide the required security; and it is doubtful whether
their small needs would, in any event, receive consideration. In 1912 the
largest of Boston's mutual savings banks — the Provident Institution for
Savings, which is the pioneer mutual savings bank of America — managed
$53,000,000 of people's money. Nearly one-half of the resources ($24,262,072)
was invested in bonds — state, municipal, railroad, railway and telephone and
in bank stock; or was deposited in national banks or trust companies.
Two-fifths of the resources ($20,764,770) were loaned on real estate mortgages;
and the average amount of a loan was $52,569. One-sevefith of the resources
($7,566,612) was loaned on personal security; and the average of each of these
loans was $54,830. Obviously, the "small man" is not conspicuous among the
borrowers; and these large-scale investments do not even serve the individual
depositor especially well; for this bank pays its depositors a rate of interest
lower than the average. Even our admirable Postal Savings Bank system serves
productively mainly the capitalist. These postal saving stations are in effect
catch-basins merely, which collect the people's money for distribution among
the national banks. 

PROGRESS 

Alphonse Desjardins of Levis, Province of Quebec, has demonstrated that
cooperative credit associations are appHcable, also, to at least some m-ban
communities. Levis, situated on the St. Lawrence opposite the City of Quebec,
is a city of 8,000 inhabitants. Desjardins himself is a man of the people. Many
years ago he became impressed with the fact that the people's savings were not
utilized primarily to aid the people productively. There were then located in
Levis branches of three ordinary banks of deposit — a mutual savings bank, the
postal savings bank, and three incorporated "loaners"; but the people were not
served. After much thinking, he chanced to read of the European rural banks.
He proceeded to work out the idea for use in Levis; and in 1900 established
there the first "credit-union." For seven years he watched carefully the
operations of this little bank. The pioneer union had accumulated in that
period SSO,000 in resources. It had made 2900 loans to its members, aggregating
$350,000; the loans averaging SI 20 in amount, and the interest rate 6 1/2 per
cent. In all this time the bank had not met with a single loas. Then Desjardins
concluded that democratic banking was applicable to Canada; and he proceeded to
establish other credit-unions. In the last 5 years the number of credit-unions
in the Province of Quebec has grown to 121; and 19 have been established in the
Province of Ontario. Desjardins was not merely the pioneer. All the later
credit-unions also have been established through his aid; and 24 applications
are now in hand requesting like assistance from him. Year after year that aid
has been given without pay by this public-spirited man of large family and
small means, who lives as simply as the ordinary mechanic. And it is noteworthy
that this rapidly extending system of cooperative creditbanks has been
established in Canada wholely without government aid, Desjardins having given
his services free, and his travelling expenses having been paid by those
seeking his assistance. 

In 1909, Massachusetts, under Desjardin's guidance, enacted a law for the
incorporation of credit-unions. The first union established in Springfield, in
1910, was named after Herbert Myrick— a strong advocate of cooperative finance.
Since then 25 other unions have been formed; and the names of the unions and of
their officers disclose that 11 are Jewish, 8 French-Canadian, and 2 Italian —
a strong indication that the immigrant is not unprepared for financial
democracy. There is reason to believe that these people's banks will spread
rapidlj^ in the United States and that they will succeed. For the cooperative
building and loan associations, managed by wage-earners and salarj^-earners,
who joined together for systematic saving and ownership of houses — have
prospered in many states. In Massachusetts, where they have existed for 35
years, their success has been notable — the number, in 1912, being 162, and
their aggregate assets nearly $75,000,000. 

Thus farmers, workingmen, and clerks are learning to use their little capital
and their savings to help one another instead of turning over their money to
the great bankers for safe keeping, and to be themselves exploited. And may we
not expect that when the cooperative movement develops in America, merchants
and manufacturers will learn from farmers and workingmen how to help themselves
by helping one another, and thus join in attaining the New Freedom for all?
When merchants and manufacturers learn this lesson, money kings will lose
subjcM'ts, and swollen fortunes may siu'ink; but industries will flourish,
because the faculties of men will be liberated and developed. 

President Wilson has said wisely: 

"No country can afford to have its prosperity originated by a small controlling
class. The treasury of America does not lie in the brains of the small body of
men now in control of the great enterprises. ... It depends upon the inventions
of unknown men, upon the originations of unknown men, upon the ambitions of
unknown men. Every country is renewed out of the ranks of the unknown, not out
of the ranks of the already famous and powerful in control." 


THE END 

